gh-131591: Add remote debugging attachment protocol documentation (#132638)
python/cpython: Doc/howto/remote_debugging.rst

.. _remote-debugging:

> Remote Debugging Attachment Protocol
> ====================================

Reviewer: Let's use sentence case for headers: https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#capitalization

We're not very consistent, but let's at least follow it for new pages.

```suggestion
Remote debugging attachment protocol
====================================
```

This section explains the low-level protocol that allows external code to inject and execute
a Python script inside a running CPython process.

This is the mechanism implemented by the :func:`sys.remote_exec` function, which
instructs a remote Python process to execute a ``.py`` file. This section is not about using that

> function, instead, it explains how the underlying protocol works so that it can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function; instead, it explains how the underlying protocol works so that it can be
```

> function, instead, it explains how the underlying protocol works so that it can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
function; instead, it explains how the underlying protocol works so that it can be
```

> reimplemented in any language.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
reimplemented in any tool independently of the language.
```

> The protocol assumes you already know the process you want to target and the code you want it to run.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The protocol takes as input data the PID of the target process and a file containing the code to be executed.
```

In general, I recommend to not talk to a person (you) but in generic terms. We are writing a spec more than anything so it needs to read a bit more technical :)

Reviewer 3: Ah instead I think we should drop this line and merge it with the following ones

That’s why it takes two pieces of information:

> - The process ID (``pid``) of the Python process you want to interact with.
> - A path to a Python script file (``.py``) that contains the code to be executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The process ID (``pid``) of the Python process you want to interact with.
- A path to the file that contains the code to be executed.
```
The file is explained (in almost too much detail) just above. We probably can also just write "pid" and omit the explanation.

> Once injected, the script is executed by the target process’s interpreter the next time it reaches

Reviewer 3: We need an admonition (warning level) explaining that this means the code can take an arbitrary amount of time to execute (once the interpreter arrives to the eval breaker).

a safe evaluation point. This allows tools to trigger
code execution remotely without modifying the Python program itself.

> In the sections that follow, we’ll walk through each step of this protocol in detail: how to locate

Reviewer 2: This should have a different tone IMO, though I am split since this is a `howto`.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. @ivonastojanovic check some pointers to get a more formal tone here: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/132638#issuecomment-2814178949

the interpreter in memory, how to access internal structures safely, and how to trigger the execution

> of your script. Where necessary, we’ll highlight differences across platforms (Linux, macOS, Windows),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of your script. Where necessary, we’ll highlight differences across platforms,
```

and include example code to help clarify each part of the process.

> Locating the PyRuntime Structure
> ================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locating the PyRuntime structure
================================
```

The ``PyRuntime`` structure holds CPython's global interpreter state and serves as
the entry point to other internal data, including the list of interpreters,
thread states, and debugger support fields.

> To interact with a remote Python process, a debugger must first compute the memory

Reviewer 3: Really good and very clear! Nice :)

address of the ``PyRuntime`` structure inside the target process. This cannot be
hardcoded or inferred symbolically, since its location depends on how the binary was
mapped into memory by the operating system.

> The process for locating ``PyRuntime`` is platform-specific, but follows the same

Reviewer 3: Maybe preface this by explaining that to facilitate locating this field, CPythons stores the contents of the symbol (PyRuntime) in a specific section in a platform -specific way. Then you can explain how to read it

high-level approach:

1. Identify where the Python executable or shared library was loaded in the target process.
2. Parse the corresponding binary file on disk to find the offset of the
   ``.PyRuntime`` section.
3. Compute the in-memory address of ``PyRuntime`` by relocating the section offset
   to the base address found in step 1.

Each subsection below explains what must be done and provides a short example of how this
can be implemented.

> .. rubric:: Linux (ELF)

Reviewer: TIL :)

https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-rubric

To locate the ``PyRuntime`` structure on Linux:

> 1. Inspect the memory mappings of the target process (e.g. from ``/proc/<pid>/maps``)

Reviewer: Let's avoid Latin abbreviations: https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#use-simple-language
```suggestion
1. Inspect the memory mappings of the target process (for example, from ``/proc/<pid>/maps``)
```

   to find the memory region where the Python executable or shared ``libpython``
   library is loaded. Record its base address.
2. Load the binary file from disk and parse its ELF section headers.
   Locate the ``.PyRuntime`` section and determine its file offset.
3. Add the section offset to the base address to compute the address of the
   ``PyRuntime`` structure in memory.

> An example implementation might look like:

Reviewer: This is an example, and this is how this one looks.

```suggestion
An example implementation looks like:
```
or
```suggestion
An implementation might look like:
```

> An example implementation might look like:
> 
> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer: Python is the default, so we can use a shortcut if you like:

```suggestion
An example implementation might look like::
```
If so, please also update the ones below.

>     def find_py_runtime_linux(pid):

Reviewer: It's certainly not necessary, but would it be helpful to give type hints on these examples?
```suggestion
    def find_py_runtime_linux(pid: int) -> int:
```

>         # Step 1: Try to find the Python executable in memory
>         binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(pid, name_contains="python")
>         # Step 2: Fallback to shared library if executable is not found
>         if binary_path is None:
>             binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(pid, name_contains="libpython")
>         # Step 3: Parse ELF headers of the binary to get .PyRuntime section offset
>         section_offset = parse_elf_section_offset(binary_path, ".PyRuntime")
>         # Step 4: Compute PyRuntime address in memory
>         return base_address + section_offset

Reviewer: Some newlines between steps could help?

<img width="813" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb178294-2841-479d-b383-6c5f828d1807" />

<img width="813" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb81321f-8439-4e3d-bf11-ccef173660f9" />

```suggestion
        # Step 1: Try to find the Python executable in memory
        binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(pid, name_contains="python")

        # Step 2: Fallback to shared library if executable is not found
        if binary_path is None:
            binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(pid, name_contains="libpython")

        # Step 3: Parse ELF headers of the binary to get .PyRuntime section offset
        section_offset = parse_elf_section_offset(binary_path, ".PyRuntime")

        # Step 4: Compute PyRuntime address in memory
        return base_address + section_offset
```

.. rubric:: macOS (Mach-O)

To locate the ``PyRuntime`` structure on macOS:

> 1. Obtain a handle to the target process that allows memory inspection.

Reviewer 3: Without context on the function calls to get a handle and given how opaque Apple tends to be this is not very clear. Could we maybe mention the actual APIs that we need to use at least so users know what "handle" means here?

2. Walk the memory regions of the process to identify the one that contains the
   Python binary or shared library. Record its base address and associated file path.
3. Load that binary file from disk and parse the Mach-O headers to find the

>    ``__DATA,__PyRuntime`` section.

Reviewer 3: Here apple does weird things showing it but the section is still called `_PyRuntime`. Apple preprends a _ to all symbols and __DATA means is a data section

4. Add the section's offset to the base address of the loaded binary to compute
   the address of the ``PyRuntime`` structure.

> An example implementation might look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example implementation looks like:
```
or
```suggestion
An implementation might look like:
```

.. code-block:: python

    def find_py_runtime_macos(pid):
        # Step 1: Get access to the process's memory
        handle = get_memory_access_handle(pid)
        # Step 2: Try to find the Python executable in memory
        binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(handle, name_contains="python")
        # Step 3: Fallback to libpython if executable is not found
        if binary_path is None:
            binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(handle, name_contains="libpython")
        # Step 4: Parse Mach-O headers to get __DATA,__PyRuntime section offset
        section_offset = parse_macho_section_offset(binary_path, "__DATA", "__PyRuntime")
        # Step 5: Compute PyRuntime address in memory
        return base_address + section_offset

.. rubric:: Windows (PE)

To locate the ``PyRuntime`` structure on Windows:

> 1. Enumerate all modules loaded in the target process.

Reviewer 3: Same thing as the Apple case but in this case we can at least link to the docs of the functions

>    Identify the module corresponding to ``python.exe`` or ``pythonXY.dll``, where X and Y
>    are the major and minor version numbers of the Python version, and record its base address.

Reviewer: This makes the bit in `{}`be shown in italics:
https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#role-file

```suggestion
   Identify the module corresponding to :file:`python.exe` or :file:``python{XY}.dll`, where X and Y
   are the major and minor version numbers of the Python version, and record its base address.
```

2. Load the binary from disk and parse the PE section headers.

>    Locate the ``.PyRuntime`` section and determine its relative virtual address (RVA).

Reviewer 4: In case of Windows, the prefix `.` is not used:
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/5707837049e8eade92e29f20f055112821b75cd0/Include/internal/pycore_debug_offsets.h#L29-L31
in contrast to Linux
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/5707837049e8eade92e29f20f055112821b75cd0/Include/internal/pycore_debug_offsets.h#L44-L47

Furthermore, there is an 8 byte length limit on section headers for Microsofts PE format, see https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/debug/pe-format#section-table-section-headers.

Hence, `dumpbin` shows
```
Dump of file amd64\python314_d.dll

File Type: DLL

  Summary

        1000 .00cfg
       F0000 .data
        5000 .idata
       30000 .pdata
      34E000 .rdata
       15000 .reloc
        1000 .rsrc
      89A000 .text
        1000 .tls
       5F000 PyRuntim
```
This is e.g. taken care about in
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/ac14d4a23f58c1f3e1909753aa17c1c302ea771d/Python/remote_debugging.c#L497
where `IMAGE_SIZEOF_SHORT_NAME=8`.

So let's document that and note to search for `PyRuntim` in case of Windows?

I am unsure about whether the `.` prefix or the `,` prefix in case of `__APPLE__`
https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/5707837049e8eade92e29f20f055112821b75cd0/Include/internal/pycore_debug_offsets.h#L36-L39 is part of the lookup, a deeper look into`remote_debugging.c` or @pablogsal can clarify.

Reviewer 3: In macOS is mapped without the ".":

```
$ otool -l python.exe | grep -C 10 Runtime
Section
  sectname PyRuntime
   segname __DATA
      addr 0x0000000100599538
      size 0x0000000000050d20
    offset 5870904
     align 2^3 (8)
    reloff 0
    nreloc 0
     flags 0x00000000
 reserved1 0
 reserved2 0
```

3. Add the RVA to the module’s base address to compute the full in-memory address
   of the ``PyRuntime`` structure.

> An example implementation might look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example implementation looks like:
```
or
```suggestion
An implementation might look like:
```

.. code-block:: python

    def find_py_runtime_windows(pid):
        # Step 1: Try to find the Python executable in memory
        binary_path, base_address = find_loaded_module(pid, name_contains="python")
        # Step 2: Fallback to shared pythonXY.dll if executable is not found
        if binary_path is None:
            binary_path, base_address = find_loaded_module(pid, name_contains="python3")

>         # Step 3: Parse PE section headers to get .PyRuntime RVA

Reviewer 4: `PyRuntim` due to the limit of 8 and the `.` not being used.

        section_rva = parse_pe_section_offset(binary_path, ".PyRuntime")
        # Step 4: Compute PyRuntime address in memory
        return base_address + section_rva

> Reading _Py_DebugOffsets
> =========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reading _Py_DebugOffsets
========================
```

Once the address of the ``PyRuntime`` structure has been computed in the target
process, the next step is to read the ``_Py_DebugOffsets`` structure located at
its beginning.

This structure contains version-specific field offsets needed to navigate
interpreter and thread state memory safely.

To read and validate the debug offsets:

1. Read the memory at the address of ``PyRuntime``, up to the size of
   ``_Py_DebugOffsets``. This structure is located at the very start of the

>    ``PyRuntime`` block.

Reviewer 3: Explain that this structure is stable withing a minor version but can change per major version. The structure contents and size must be retrieved from CPython headers

2. Verify that the contents of the structure are valid. In particular:

   - The ``cookie`` field must match the expected debug marker.
   - The ``version`` field must match the version of the Python interpreter

>      used by the calling process (i.e., the debugger or controlling runtime).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     used by the calling process (that is, the debugger or controlling runtime).
```

   - If either the caller or the target process is running a pre-release version
     (such as an alpha, beta, or release candidate), then the versions must match
     exactly.
   - The ``free_threaded`` flag must match between the caller and the target process.

3. If the structure passes validation, the debugger may now safely use the
   provided offsets to locate fields in interpreter and thread state structures.

> If any validation step fails, the debugger should abort rather than attempting to

Reviewer 3: :ok_hand:

access incompatible memory layouts.

An example of how a debugger might read and validate ``_Py_DebugOffsets``:

.. code-block:: python

    def read_debug_offsets(pid, py_runtime_addr):
        # Step 1: Read memory from the target process at the PyRuntime address
        data = read_process_memory(pid, address=py_runtime_addr, size=DEBUG_OFFSETS_SIZE)
        # Step 2: Deserialize the raw bytes into a _Py_DebugOffsets structure
        debug_offsets = parse_debug_offsets(data)
        # Step 3: Validate compatibility
        if debug_offsets.cookie != EXPECTED_COOKIE:
            raise RuntimeError("Invalid or missing debug cookie")
        if debug_offsets.version != LOCAL_PYTHON_VERSION:
            raise RuntimeError("Mismatch between caller and target Python versions")
        if debug_offsets.free_threaded != LOCAL_FREE_THREADED:
            raise RuntimeError("Mismatch in free-threaded configuration")
        return debug_offsets

> Locating the Interpreter and Thread State
> =========================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locating the interpreter and thread state
=========================================
```

> Locating the Interpreter and Thread State
> =========================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locating the interpreter and thread state
=========================================
```

> After validating the ``_Py_DebugOffsets`` structure, the next step is to locate the

Reviewer 3: Here before saying this explain that we need to decide in what thread or treads we want to schedule code to and then we must find the `_PyRemoteDebuggerSupport`. Without understanding that the goal is to reach the debug control info this paragraph can be confusing when read for the first time

interpreter and thread state objects within the target process. These structures
hold essential runtime context and are required for writing debugger control
information.

- The ``PyInterpreterState`` structure represents a Python interpreter instance.
  Each interpreter holds its own module imports, built-in state, and thread list.
  Most applications use only one interpreter, but CPython supports creating multiple
  interpreters in the same process.

- The ``PyThreadState`` structure represents a thread running within an interpreter.
  This is where evaluation state and the control fields used by the debugger live.

> To inject and run code remotely, the debugger must locate a valid ``PyThreadState``

Reviewer 3: basically maybe mention this at the start

to target. Typically, this is the main thread, but in some cases, the debugger may
want to attach to a specific thread by its native thread ID.

> To locate a thread:

Reviewer 3: Important! Before this section add a warning explaining that we recomend to do this with the process stopped. Users can use `ptrace` or using SIGSTOP to stop the process while this operations are being done to avoid racing with the interpreter changing values or creating threads. Put this in an admonition

Reviewer 3: See also https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/132638/files#r2049751802

        threads_main_ptr = interp_addr + debug_offsets.interpreter_state.threads_main
        thread_state_addr = read_pointer(pid, threads_main_ptr)
        if thread_state_addr == 0:
            raise RuntimeError("Main thread state is not available")
        return thread_state_addr

To locate a specific thread by native thread ID:

.. code-block:: python

    def find_thread_by_id(pid, interp_addr, debug_offsets, target_tid):
        # Start at threads_head and walk the linked list
        thread_ptr = read_pointer(
            pid, interp_addr + debug_offsets.interpreter_state.threads_head
        )
        while thread_ptr:
            native_tid_ptr = thread_ptr + debug_offsets.thread_state.native_thread_id
            native_tid = read_int(pid, native_tid_ptr)
            if native_tid == target_tid:
                return thread_ptr
            thread_ptr = read_pointer(pid, thread_ptr + debug_offsets.thread_state.next)
        raise RuntimeError("Thread with the given ID was not found")

Once a valid thread state has been identified, the debugger can use it to modify
control fields and request execution in the next stage of the protocol.

> Writing Control Information
> ===========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing control information
===========================
```

Once a valid thread state has been located, the debugger can write control fields
that instruct the target process to execute a script at the next safe opportunity.

Each thread state contains a ``_PyRemoteDebuggerSupport`` structure, which is used
to coordinate communication between the debugger and the interpreter. The debugger
uses offsets from ``_Py_DebugOffsets`` to locate three key fields:

- ``debugger_script_path``: A buffer where the debugger writes the full path to
  a Python source file (``.py``). The file must exist and be readable by the
  target process.

- ``debugger_pending_call``: An integer flag. When set to ``1``, it signals
  that a script is ready to be executed.

- ``eval_breaker``: A field checked periodically by the evaluation loop. To
  notify the interpreter of pending debugger activity, the debugger sets the
  ``_PY_EVAL_PLEASE_STOP_BIT`` in this field. This causes the interpreter to pause
  and check for debugger-related actions before continuing with normal execution.

> To safely modify these fields, most debuggers should suspend the process before

Reviewer 3: This needs to be moved to an admonition to make it even more clear and also in the previous section. See https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/132638/files#r2049750050

Reviewer 3: also maybe explain that profilers may choose to not stop the process but they must work carefully and deal with the consequences.

1. Write the script path into the ``debugger_script_path`` buffer.
2. Set the ``debugger_pending_call`` flag to ``1``.
3. Read the value of ``eval_breaker``, set the stop bit, and write the updated
   value back.

An example implementation might look like:

.. code-block:: python

    def inject_script(pid, thread_state_addr, debug_offsets, script_path):
        # Base offset to the _PyRemoteDebuggerSupport struct
        support_base = (
            thread_state_addr +
            debug_offsets.debugger_support.remote_debugger_support
        )
        # 1. Write script path
        script_path_ptr = support_base + debug_offsets.debugger_support.debugger_script_path
        write_string(pid, script_path_ptr, script_path)
        # 2. Set debugger_pending_call = 1
        pending_ptr = support_base + debug_offsets.debugger_support.debugger_pending_call
        write_int(pid, pending_ptr, 1)
        # 3. Set _PY_EVAL_PLEASE_STOP_BIT in eval_breaker
        eval_breaker_ptr = thread_state_addr + debug_offsets.debugger_support.eval_breaker
        breaker = read_int(pid, eval_breaker_ptr)
        # Set the least significant bit (this is _PY_EVAL_PLEASE_STOP_BIT)

>         breaker |= 1

Reviewer 3: The value is not 1:

```
#define _PY_EVAL_PLEASE_STOP_BIT (1U << 5)
```

.. _remote-debugging:

Remote debugging attachment protocol
====================================

This section describes the low-level protocol that enables external tools to
inject and execute a Python script within a running CPython process.

This mechanism forms the basis of the :func:`sys.remote_exec` function, which
instructs a remote Python process to execute a ``.py`` file. However, this
section does not document the usage of that function. Instead, it provides a
detailed explanation of the underlying protocol, which takes as input the
``pid`` of a target Python process and the path to a Python source file to be
executed. This information supports independent reimplementation of the

> protocol, regardless of programming language.
> 
> 
> .. warning::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
protocol, regardless of programming language.

.. warning::
```
Consistency

        if binary_path is None:
            binary_path, base_address = find_mapped_binary(
                handle, name_contains="libpython"
            )

        # Step 4: Parse Mach-O headers to get __DATA,__PyRuntime section offset
        section_offset = parse_macho_section_offset(
            binary_path, "__DATA", "__PyRuntime"
        )

        # Step 5: Compute the PyRuntime address in memory
        return base_address + section_offset

.. rubric:: Windows (PE)

To find the ``PyRuntime`` structure on Windows:

1. Use the ToolHelp API to enumerate all modules loaded in the target process.
   This is done using functions such as `CreateToolhelp32Snapshot
   <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/tlhelp32/nf-tlhelp32-createtoolhelp32snapshot>`_,
   `Module32First
   <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/tlhelp32/nf-tlhelp32-module32first>`_,
   and `Module32Next
   <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/tlhelp32/nf-tlhelp32-module32next>`_.
2. Identify the module corresponding to :file:`python.exe` or
   :file:`python{XY}.dll`, where ``X`` and ``Y`` are the major and minor

>    version numbers of the Python version (for example, ``python311.dll``), and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   version numbers of the Python version, and
```
I think an example here is overkill

   record its base address.

> 3. Locate the ``PyRuntim`` section. Section names in the PE format are limited

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Locate the ``PyRuntime`` section. Section names in the PE format are limited
```

Reviewer 4: That's no typo and due to the 8 byte length limit in the PE format. Maybe that should be reformulated to make it clearer?

Author: Updated the explanation to clarify the PE section name limit. Let me know what you think.

   to 8 characters.
4. Retrieve the section’s relative virtual address (RVA) and add it to the base
   address of the module.

The following is an example implementation::

    def find_py_runtime_windows(pid: int) -> int:
        # Step 1: Try to find the Python executable in memory
        binary_path, base_address = find_loaded_module(
            pid, name_contains="python"
        )

        # Step 2: Fallback to shared pythonXY.dll if the executable is not
        # found
        if binary_path is None:
            binary_path, base_address = find_loaded_module(
                pid, name_contains="python3"
            )

        # Step 3: Parse PE section headers to get PyRuntim RVA
        section_rva = parse_pe_section_offset(binary_path, "PyRuntim")

        # Step 4: Compute PyRuntime address in memory
        return base_address + section_rva

> RReading _Py_DebugOffsets
> =========================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reading _Py_DebugOffsets
========================
```

        # eval_breaker
        eval_breaker_ptr = (
            thread_state_addr +
            debug_offsets.debugger_support.eval_breaker
        )
        breaker = read_int(pid, eval_breaker_ptr)
        breaker |= (1 << 5)
        write_int(pid, eval_breaker_ptr, breaker)

Once these fields are set, the debugger may resume the process (if it was
suspended).  The interpreter will process the request at the next safe
evaluation point, load the script from disk, and execute it.

It is the responsibility of the debugger to ensure that the script file remains
present and accessible to the target process during execution.

.. note::

   Script execution is asynchronous. The script file cannot be deleted
   immediately after injection. The debugger should wait until the injected
   script has produced an observable effect before removing the file.
   This effect depends on what the script is designed to do. For example,
   a debugger might wait until the remote process connects back to a socket
   before removing the script. Once such an effect is observed, it is safe to
   assume the file is no longer needed.

Summary
=======

> To inject and execute a Python script in a remote parocess:

Reviewer 2: @pablogsal Uh oh... typo, `process`

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/132785

Reviewer 3: Thanks!
